---
layout: post
title:  "On Fold"
date:   2014-12-26 02:00:00
description: Mini-tutorial on fold
categories:
- blog
permalink: on-fold
---

### Consable

{% highlight haskell %}
class Consable f where
  empty :: f a
  cons :: a -> f a -> f a
{% endhighlight %}

It's quite clear which kind of behaviour this type class expressed: given a container of type `f`, the `empty` function should return the empty value for this container and the `cons` function should
prepend a value of type a to a container of aS.

For instance if we want the list type to be Consable, here's the following implementation:

{% highlight haskell %}
instance Consable [] where
  empty = []
  cons = (:)
{% endhighlight %}

These two simple functions define a first simple layer of abstraction for working with containers.

### Foldable

{% highlight haskell %}
class Foldable f where
   fold :: (a -> b -> b) -> b -> f a -> b
{% endhighlight %}

The fold function takes a function that combines a value `r :: b` and `x :: a`, a container of As and a initial value `r0 :: b` and combines each element of the container using the given function.

A way of explaining this that I really like is to look at fold as a way to replace the constructor of your container by the fold-ing function.

So let's take as an example folding over a cons list.

Our data type is:

{% highlight haskell %}
 data List a = Nil | Cons a (List a)
{% endhighlight %}

The list `[1, 2, 3, 4]` is then expressed as: `Cons 1 (Cons 2 (Cons 3 (Cons 4 Nil)))`

Let's keep this structure but just change the way we show it.

                 Cons
                /    \
               1      Cons
                     /    \
                    2      Cons
                          /    \
                         3      Cons
                               /    \
                              4      Nil

Same structure, it just looks different.

Now as is said, i like to see fold as replacing the constructor of my container by my fold-ing function. so let's say i want to sum all the elements of my list, the function would be `(+)`.

Our list then becomes: `1 + (2 + (3 + (4 + Nil)))`, or


                  +
                /   \
               1     +
                   /   \
                  2     +
                       /  \
                      3    +
                          /  \
                         4    Nil


Now 4 + Nil doesn't make sense, and that's why the fold function takes as a second argument an initial value, it's simply to map the empty list `Nil` to a value of our folded type.

In the case of summing the values of our list, the default value is 0.

Now we have : `1 + (2 + (3 + (4 + 0)))`, or

                  +
                /   \
               1     +
                   /   \
                  2     +
                       /  \
                      3    +
                          /  \
                         4    0

So to do all this we would do the collowing function call: `fold (+) 0 (Cons 1 (Cons 2 (Cons 3 (Cons 4 Nil))))` which would evaluate to 10.

### The cool part

We defined a way to fold on list-like data structures, but the nice thing about the concept of fold as a replacement of a constructor, is that is can be used for any recursive data structure, as a short example let's look at how we could fold on a tree.

{% highlight haskell %}
data Tree a = Empty | Node (Tree a) a (Tree a)

foldTree :: (b -> a -> b -> b) -> b -> Tree a -> b
foldTree _ z Empty = z
foldTree f z (Node l x r) = f (foldTree f z l) x (foldTree f z r)
{% endhighlight %}

If we want to count the total number of nodes in the tree we can use the following reducing function

{% highlight haskell %}
countNodes :: Int -> a -> Int -> Int
countNodes l _ r = l + 1 + r
{% endhighlight %}
